index.md, before:


<!-- [<img src="images/IMG_1847.JPG" alt="Portrait"/>](https://sites.google.com/site/ruihanwu14/) -->

<!-- Photo credit: [Chao Zhang](http://chaozhang.org/) -->

## Contact
Email: xiusic [AT] illinois [DOT] edu    
Office: 4211 Siebel Center for Computer Science, 201 N. Goodwin Ave, Urbana, IL 61801    

<!-- ## What's New
2018-09-10 Start my Ph.D. journey @ UCLA!

2018-08-17 One paper got accepted by ICDM'18.

2018-05-06 One paper got accepted by KDD'18.

2018-11-09 One paper got accepted by AAAI'18.

2017-10-01 Submitted one paper to ICDE'18.

2017-09-12 Submitted two papers to AAAI'18.

2017-04-12 Our paper on Index of distributed graph data processing systems was accepted by [NDBC 2017](http://www.cs.zju.edu.cn/ndbc2017/)! See you in Hangzhou this Autumn!

2017-06-30 Visiting Prof. [ChengXiang Zhai](http://czhai.cs.illinois.edu/)'s [TIMAN](http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/ir/index.html) Group at CS@UIUC for 6 months.

2017-05-23 Submitted one paper to CIKM'17.

2016-09-26 Start my internship as a research intern at [Alibaba Group](http://www.alibabagroup.com/en/global/home)

2016-04-12 Our paper on Semi-supervised advertisement detection was accepted by [NDBC 2016](http://csse.szu.edu.cn/ndbc2016/index.shtml)! See you in Shenzhen this Autumn!

2015-07-06 I graduated from [Peking University](http://www.pku.edu.cn/) where I spent 4 wonderful years and made lots of great friends. I am grateful to Prof. [Jun Gao]() for his support throughout the years. [My thesis](papers/thesis.pdf)

2014-10-26 I am honor to compete on behalf of Peking University at the 17th Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA) Championships, Beijing Division. We are the 3rd Place!
 -->

## Bio
I am a postdoctoral research fellow in [Blender Lab](https://blender.cs.illinois.edu/index.html) at [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign](https://siebelschool.illinois.edu/) (UIUC), working with Prof. [Heng Ji](https://blender.cs.illinois.edu/hengji.html). My research mainly aims at improving reasoning, alignment, and decision-making of Large Language Models (LLMs).

I completed my Ph.D. in Computer Science at [University of California, Los Angeles](https://www.cs.ucla.edu/) (UCLA), advised by Prof. [Wei Wang](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/~weiwang/). Before UCLA, I got my B.S. in Computer Science from [Peking University](https://cs.pku.edu.cn/English/Home.htm), advised by Prof. [Jun Gao](https://cs.pku.edu.cn/info/1214/1977.htm). I also worked with Prof. [ChengXiang Zhai](http://czhai.cs.illinois.edu/) at UIUC for a wonderful summer. During Ph.D., I spent two summers at Amazon Science and one summer at NEC Labs America.

I played for Peking University Men's Basketball Varsity Team, Division II, during college.

My CV is available [here](CV.pdf).

## Research Interests
My ultimate research goal is to build automated language agents that can assist human in a variety of domains. To achieve this goal, I worked on:    
*    **Large Language Models**, especially low-resource LLM reasoning ([_ACL'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.05007.pdf), [_ICML'24a_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04624), [_ICLR'25a_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.00487), [_COLM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.13849), [_SDM'23_](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/epdf/10.1137/1.9781611977653.ch102), [_WSDM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04616.pdf)) and alignment ([_NAACL'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.18341.pdf));    
*    **NLP Applications**, especially in AI for Science, IR and recommendation ([_EMNLP'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.10833), [_ICML'24b_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.07815), [_CIKM'22a_](papers/cikm_b.pdf), [_Amazon Reviews'23 dataset_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.03952));    
*    **Complex Dynamics Modeling and Decision Making**, especially the planning tasks in sports domain ([_CIKM'22b_](papers/cikm_a.pdf), [_CIKM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.04090.pdf), [_ICLR'25b_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.10635), [_Arxiv'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13549), [_Arxiv'25_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.11435)).

**To junior Ph.D./master/undergraduate students:** If you would like to chat about your career plan or research ideas related to my research interests, please email me to schedule a meeting. I will dedicate 30 minutes to each meeting weekly. I encourage students from underrepresented groups to reach out and will prioritize these meetings.

<span style="color:red"> I will be on the job market starting in Fall 2025. If you believe I might be a good fit for your institution or organization, I’d love to connect! — please feel free to reach out at xiusic[AT]illinois.edu</span>

### Invited Talks
Nov 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seminar Talk at Northeastern University about [Agentic Post-Training Data and Algorithms](papers/NEU_seminar.pdf)    
Oct 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guest Lecture at CS6320 Natural Language Processing, UT Dallas about [Post-Training Data and Algorithms for LLM Agents](papers/UTD_guest.pdf)    
Sept 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at ByteDance Seed Research about [Post-Training Data and Algorithms for LLM Agents](papers/ByteDance_Talk.pdf)    
Aug  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keynote at [KDD 2025 Large Language Model For E-Commerce Workshop](https://kdd2025llm4ecommerce.github.io/schedule/) about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/keynote_LLMEcommerce.pdf)    
Aug  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at [DARPA ITM](https://www.darpa.mil/research/programs/in-the-moment) August 2025 PI Meeting    
May  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tutorial at NAACL 2025 about [LLM Alignment for Copyright Risk Mitigation](papers/naacl25_tutorial.pdf)    
Oct  2024&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at UIUC-NLP about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/uiuc_nlp_10.25.2024.pdf)    
July 2024&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at UCSD CSE about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/DARPA_talk.pdf)    

## Selected Publications [[Full List](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=JqGAil4AAAAJ&view_op=list_works&sortby=pubdate)]
#### ("\*" marks equal contribution.)

[RM-R1: Reward Modeling as Reasoning](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.02387)    
**Xiusi Chen**\*, Gaotang Li\*, Ziqi Wang\*, Bowen Jin, Cheng Qian, Yu Wang, Hongru WANG, Yu Zhang, Denghui Zhang, Tong Zhang, Hanghang Tong, Heng Ji    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/RM-R1-UIUC/RM-R1)\]\[[dataset & model checkpoints](https://huggingface.co/collections/gaotang/rm-r1-681128cdab932701cad844c8)\]    
<span style="color:red">100+ stars on GitHub</span>

[Beyond Log Likelihood: Probability-Based Objectives for Supervised Fine-Tuning across the Model Capability Continuum](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.00526)    
Gaotang Li\*, Ruizhong Qiu\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Heng Ji, Hanghang Tong    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/GaotangLi/Beyond-Log-Likelihood)\]    

[DecisionFlow: Advancing Large Language Model as Principled Decision Maker](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.21397)    
**Xiusi Chen**\*, Shanyong Wang\*, Cheng Qian\*, Hongru WANG\*, Peixuan Han, Heng Ji   
_EMNLP 2025 Findings_    
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/DecisionFlow)\]    

[MinPrompt: Graph-based Minimal Prompt Data Augmentation for Few-shot Question Answering](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.05007.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Wei-Cheng Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Hsiang-Fu Yu and Wei Wang     
_ACL 2024_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/MinPrompt)\]

[IterAlign: Iterative Constitutional Alignment of Large Language Models](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.18341.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Hongzhi Wen, Sreyashi Nag, Chen Luo, Qingyu Yin, Ruirui Li, Zheng Li, Wei Wang    
_NAACL 2024_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/IterAlign)\]

[PlayBest: Professional Basketball Player Behavior Synthesis via Planning with Diffusion](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.04090.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Wei-Yao Wang, Ziniu Hu, David Reynoso, Kun Jin, Mingyan Liu, P. Jeffrey Brantingham, Wei Wang     
_CIKM 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/diffuser_bball)\]

[A Comprehensive Survey of Scientific Large Language Models and Their Applications in Scientific Discovery](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.10833)    
Yu Zhang\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Bowen Jin\*, Sheng Wang, Shuiwang Ji, Wei Wang, Jiawei Han    
_EMNLP 2024_     
\[[repo](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/Awesome-Scientific-Language-Models)\]    
<span style="color:red">600+ stars on GitHub</span>

[Beyond Answers: Transferring Reasoning Capabilities to Smaller LLMs Using Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04616.pdf)    
Yijun Tian\*, Yikun Han\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Wei Wang, Nitesh V. Chawla    
_WSDM 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/YikunHan42/TinyLLM)\]

[Gotta: Generative Few-shot Question Answering by Prompt-based Cloze Data Augmentation](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/epdf/10.1137/1.9781611977653.ch102)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Yu Zhang, Jinliang Deng, Jyun-Yu Jiang and Wei Wang  
_SDM 2023_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/Gotta)\]     
<span style="color:red">Best Poster Award (Honorable Mention), Regular Paper</span>

[Scalable Graph Representation Learning via Locality-Sensitive Hashing](papers/cikm_b.pdf)   
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2022_    
\[[code]()\]

[ReLiable: Offline Reinforcement Learning for Tactical Strategies in Professional Basketball Games](papers/cikm_a.pdf)       
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Kun Jin, Yichao Zhou, Mingyan Liu, Jefferey Brantingham and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2022_    
\[[code]()\]

[ToolRL: Reward is All Tool Learning Needs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.13958)    
Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur, Heng Ji    
_NeurIPS 2026_    
\[[code](https://github.com/qiancheng0/ToolRL)\]

<!--
[OTC: Optimal Tool Calls via Reinforcement Learning](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.14870)    
Hongru Wang, Cheng Qian, Wanjun Zhong, **Xiusi Chen**, Jiahao Qiu, Shijue Huang, Bowen Jin, Mengdi Wang, Kam-Fai Wong, Heng Ji    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code]()\]
-->

[EscapeBench: Pushing Language Models to Think Outside the Box](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13549)    
Cheng Qian, Peixuan Han, Qinyu Luo, Bingxiang He, **Xiusi Chen**, Yuji Zhang, Hongyi Du, Jiarui Yao, Xiaocheng Yang, Denghui Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Heng Ji    
_ACL 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/qiancheng0/EscapeBench)\]

<!--
[One Step towards Autonomous AI Agent: Reasoning, Alignment and Planning](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qc7g63d)    
**Xiusi Chen**    
Thesis Committee: Wei Wang, Yizhou Sun, Kai-Wei Chang, P. Jefferey Brantingham    
_Ph.D. Thesis, UCLA, 2024_
-->

[Strategist: Learning Strategic Skills by LLMs via Bi-Level Tree Search](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.10635)    
Jonathan Light, Min Cai, Weiqin Chen, Guanzhi Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Cheng, Yisong Yue, Ziniu Hu    
_ICLR 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/jonathanmli/Avalon-LLM)\]\[[project page](https://llm-strategist.github.io/)\] 

[Chain-of-Factors Paper-Reviewer Matching](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.14483)    
Yu Zhang, Yanzhen Shen, SeongKu Kang, **Xiusi Chen**, Bowen Jin, Jiawei Han    
_WWW 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/CoF)\]

[Language Models as Semantic Indexers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.07815)    
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Guoyin Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Tianxin Wei, Ruirui Li, Zhengyang Wang, Zheng Li, Yang Li, Hanqing Lu, Suhang Wang, Jiawei Han, Xianfeng Tang    
_ICML 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/PeterGriffinJin/LMIndexer)\]

[TPD: Enhancing Student Language Model Reasoning via Principle Discovery and Guidance](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.13849)    
Haorui Wang, Rongzhi Zhang, Yinghao Li, Lingkai Kong, Yuchen Zhuang, **Xiusi Chen**, Chao Zhang    
_COLM 2024_    

[Bridging Language and Items for Retrieval and Recommendation](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.03952) (**Amazon Reviews 2023**)    
Yupeng Hou\*, Jiacheng Li\*, Zhankui He, An Yan, **Xiusi Chen**, Julian McAuley    
_ArXiv 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/hyp1231/AmazonReviews2023)\]\[[website](https://amazon-reviews-2023.github.io/)\]\[[huggingface](https://huggingface.co/datasets/McAuley-Lab/Amazon-Reviews-2023)\]    
<span style="color:red">200+ stars on Github</span>    
<span style="color:red">500k+ downloads on HuggingFace</span>

<!--
[Disentangling Structured Components: Towards Adaptive, Interpretable and Scalable Time Series Forecasting](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10457027)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Du Yin, Yi Yang, Xuan Song, Ivor W. Tsang    
_TKDE 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/JLDeng/SCNN)\]

[How the Experience of California Wildfires Shapes Twitter Climate Change Framings](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-023-03668-0)    
Jessie W. Y. Ko, Shengquan Ni, Alexander Taylor, **Xiusi Chen**, Yicong Huang, Avinash Kumar, Sadeem Alsudais, Zuozhi Wang, Xiaozhen Liu, Wei Wang, Chen Li, Suellen Hopfer    
_Climatic Change, 2024_

[Data Science Tasks Using Scripts versus GUI-based Workflows: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly]()    
Alexander Taylor, Yicong Huang, Junheng Hao, Xinyuan Lin, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Wang, Chen Li    
_DataPlat@ICDE 2024_

[Weakly Supervised Multi-Label Classification of Full-Text Scientific Papers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.14003.pdf)       
Yu Zhang, Bowen Jin, **Xiusi Chen**, Yanzhen Shen, Yunyi Zhang, Yu Meng, and Jiawei Han    
_KDD 2023_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/FUTEX)\]

[A Multi-view Multi-task Learning Framework for Multi-variate Time Series Forecasting](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.01657.pdf)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song and Ivor W. Tsang   
_TKDE 2022_

[MotifClass: Weakly Supervised Text Classification with Higher-order Metadata Information](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.04022.pdf)    
Yu Zhang\*, Shweta Garg\*, Yu Meng, **Xiusi Chen** and Jiawei Han    
_WSDM 2022_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/MotifClass)\]

[COVID-19 Surveiller: Toward a Robust and Effective Pandemic Surveillance System based on Social Media Mining](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/epdf/10.1098/rsta.2021.0125)    
Jyun-Yu Jiang, Yichao Zhou, **Xiusi Chen**, Yan-Ru Jhou, Liqi Zhao, Sabrina Liu, Po-Chun Yang, Jule Ahmar, Wei Wang    
_Philosophical Transactions A, 2022_

[\#StayHome or \#Marathon? Social Media Enhanced Pandemic Surveillance on Spatial-temporal Dynamic Graphs](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3459637.3482222)    
Yichao Zhou, Jyun-Yu Jiang, **Xiusi Chen** and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/joey1993/pandemic-forecast)\]

[ST-Norm: Spatial and Temporal Normalization for Multi-variate Time Series Forecasting](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3447548.3467330)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song, and Ivor W. Tsang    
_KDD 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/JLDeng/ST-Norm)\]

[Evaluating audience loyalty and authenticity in influencer marketing via multi-task multi-relational learning](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/18060/17863)    
Seungbae Kim, **Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Jinyoung Han, and Wei Wang    
_ICWSM 2021_

[The Pulse of Urban Transport: Exploring the Co-evolving Pattern for Spatio-temporal Forecasting](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3450528)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Zipei Fan, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song, and Ivor W. Tsang    
_TKDD 2021_

[Hierarchical Metadata-Aware Document Categorization under Weak Supervision](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.13556)    
Yu Zhang, **Xiusi Chen**, Yu Meng, Jiawei Han    
_WSDM 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/HIMECat)\]

[Self-Attentive Few-Shot Learning for New User Recommendation in Location-based Social Networks](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3366423.3379994)    
Ruirui Li, Xian Wu, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Wang    
_WWW 2020_

[Doc2Cube: Allocating Documents to Text Cube without Labeled Data](http://chaozhang.org/papers/icdm18.pdf)    
Fangbo Tao\*, Chao Zhang\*, **Xiusi Chen**, Meng Jiang, Tim Hanratty, Lance Kaplan, Jiawei Han    
_ICDM 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/fangbo-tao/doc2cube)\]

[TaxoGen: Unsupervised Topic Taxonomy Construction by Adaptive Term Embedding and Clustering](http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/3230000/3220064/p2701-zhang.pdf?ip=131.179.49.186&id=3220064&acc=ACTIVE%20SERVICE&key=CA367851C7E3CE77%2E79535EF926D6BC05%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35&__acm__=1543628672_ac235d30fba1750ceaae158e46248e19)    
Chao Zhang, Fangbo Tao, **Xiusi Chen**, Jiaming Shen, Meng Jiang, Brian Sadler, Michelle Vanni, Jiawei Han     
_KDD 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/franticnerd/taxogen)\]


[ATRank: An Attention-Based User Behavior Modeling Framework for Recommendation](papers/aaai18_zhou.pdf)    
Chang Zhou, Jinze Bai, Junshuai Song, Xiaofei Liu, Zhengchao Zhao, **Xiusi Chen**, Jun Gao    
_AAAI 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/jinze1994/ATRank)\]
-->

<!--
## Patent
[_Knowledge graph and alignment with uncertainty embedding_](https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/bb/ae/b3/bdfd4a1c6a8528/US20210103706A1.pdf)    
Wenchao Yu, Bo Zong, Wei Cheng, Haifeng Chen, **Xiusi Chen**    
_US Patent App. 17/060,850_
-->

## Academic Service
**Workshop Organizer**    
[_KDD 2025 workshop on Structured Knowledge for Large Language Models_](https://sknowllm.github.io/index.html)    
Co-organizer of [UIUC-NLP Seminar series](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LEzop096QH4OOwHE-5eqyuG9d5a8nCiILZhhYlJhXIE/edit?usp=sharing)    

**Conference Program Committee**        
**Area Chair**        
_ACL Rolling Review_    
**Reviewer**        
_ICML 2023-2025; NeurIPS 2022-2025; ICLR 2022-2026; AAAI 2021-2024; IJCAI-ECAI 2022-2023;_    
_KDD 2020-2025; WSDM 2022-2025; WWW 2024;_    


**Journal Reviewer**    
_IEEE Transactions on Big Data (TBD)_.

## Honors and Awards
**2023**  [Best Poster Award (Honorable Mention)](images/bpahm.pdf), _SDM 2023_   
**2023**  SIAM Student Travel Award, _SIAM_   
**2021, 2022**  SIGIR Student Travel Grant, _ACM SIGIR_    
**2016, 2017**  Graduate Student Acedemic Scholarship, _Peking University_     
**2016**  Leo KoGuan Scholarshop, _Peking University_    
**2016**  Merit Student, _Peking University_     
**2014**  3rd Place of 17th Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA) Championships, Beijing Division, _Federation of University Sports of China_   

## Miscellaneous
I played for [Peking University Men's Basketball varsity team](images/pkumbb.jpeg), division II.    
I was a registered swimming athlete in China during high school.    
I was born and raised in Changsha, Hunan, China.

<!-- 
## Links
[❤️ My Brilliant Fiancé](https://sites.google.com/site/ruihanwu14/)    
[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=JqGAil4AAAAJ)    
[Github](https://github.com/xiusic)    
[DBLP](https://dblp.org/pid/210/1049)    
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/XtremSup)    
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/xiusi-chen-53180583/)    
-->

Commit message:

Add ACL 2026 workshop to Academic Service section

index.md, after:


<!-- [<img src="images/IMG_1847.JPG" alt="Portrait"/>](https://sites.google.com/site/ruihanwu14/) -->

<!-- Photo credit: [Chao Zhang](http://chaozhang.org/) -->

## Contact
Email: xiusic [AT] illinois [DOT] edu    
Office: 4211 Siebel Center for Computer Science, 201 N. Goodwin Ave, Urbana, IL 61801    

<!-- ## What's New
2018-09-10 Start my Ph.D. journey @ UCLA!

2018-08-17 One paper got accepted by ICDM'18.

2018-05-06 One paper got accepted by KDD'18.

2018-11-09 One paper got accepted by AAAI'18.

2017-10-01 Submitted one paper to ICDE'18.

2017-09-12 Submitted two papers to AAAI'18.

2017-04-12 Our paper on Index of distributed graph data processing systems was accepted by [NDBC 2017](http://www.cs.zju.edu.cn/ndbc2017/)! See you in Hangzhou this Autumn!

2017-06-30 Visiting Prof. [ChengXiang Zhai](http://czhai.cs.illinois.edu/)'s [TIMAN](http://sifaka.cs.uiuc.edu/ir/index.html) Group at CS@UIUC for 6 months.

2017-05-23 Submitted one paper to CIKM'17.

2016-09-26 Start my internship as a research intern at [Alibaba Group](http://www.alibabagroup.com/en/global/home)

2016-04-12 Our paper on Semi-supervised advertisement detection was accepted by [NDBC 2016](http://csse.szu.edu.cn/ndbc2016/index.shtml)! See you in Shenzhen this Autumn!

2015-07-06 I graduated from [Peking University](http://www.pku.edu.cn/) where I spent 4 wonderful years and made lots of great friends. I am grateful to Prof. [Jun Gao]() for his support throughout the years. [My thesis](papers/thesis.pdf)

2014-10-26 I am honor to compete on behalf of Peking University at the 17th Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA) Championships, Beijing Division. We are the 3rd Place!
 -->

## Bio
I am a postdoctoral research fellow in [Blender Lab](https://blender.cs.illinois.edu/index.html) at [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign](https://siebelschool.illinois.edu/) (UIUC), working with Prof. [Heng Ji](https://blender.cs.illinois.edu/hengji.html). My research mainly aims at improving reasoning, alignment, and decision-making of Large Language Models (LLMs).

I completed my Ph.D. in Computer Science at [University of California, Los Angeles](https://www.cs.ucla.edu/) (UCLA), advised by Prof. [Wei Wang](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/~weiwang/). Before UCLA, I got my B.S. in Computer Science from [Peking University](https://cs.pku.edu.cn/English/Home.htm), advised by Prof. [Jun Gao](https://cs.pku.edu.cn/info/1214/1977.htm). I also worked with Prof. [ChengXiang Zhai](http://czhai.cs.illinois.edu/) at UIUC for a wonderful summer. During Ph.D., I spent two summers at Amazon Science and one summer at NEC Labs America.

I played for Peking University Men's Basketball Varsity Team, Division II, during college.

My CV is available [here](CV.pdf).

## Research Interests
My ultimate research goal is to build automated language agents that can assist human in a variety of domains. To achieve this goal, I worked on:    
*    **Large Language Models**, especially low-resource LLM reasoning ([_ACL'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.05007.pdf), [_ICML'24a_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04624), [_ICLR'25a_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.00487), [_COLM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.13849), [_SDM'23_](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/epdf/10.1137/1.9781611977653.ch102), [_WSDM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04616.pdf)) and alignment ([_NAACL'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.18341.pdf));    
*    **NLP Applications**, especially in AI for Science, IR and recommendation ([_EMNLP'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.10833), [_ICML'24b_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.07815), [_CIKM'22a_](papers/cikm_b.pdf), [_Amazon Reviews'23 dataset_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.03952));    
*    **Complex Dynamics Modeling and Decision Making**, especially the planning tasks in sports domain ([_CIKM'22b_](papers/cikm_a.pdf), [_CIKM'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.04090.pdf), [_ICLR'25b_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.10635), [_Arxiv'24_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13549), [_Arxiv'25_](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.11435)).

**To junior Ph.D./master/undergraduate students:** If you would like to chat about your career plan or research ideas related to my research interests, please email me to schedule a meeting. I will dedicate 30 minutes to each meeting weekly. I encourage students from underrepresented groups to reach out and will prioritize these meetings.

<span style="color:red"> I will be on the job market starting in Fall 2025. If you believe I might be a good fit for your institution or organization, I’d love to connect! — please feel free to reach out at xiusic[AT]illinois.edu</span>

### Invited Talks
Nov 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seminar Talk at Northeastern University about [Agentic Post-Training Data and Algorithms](papers/NEU_seminar.pdf)    
Oct 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Guest Lecture at CS6320 Natural Language Processing, UT Dallas about [Post-Training Data and Algorithms for LLM Agents](papers/UTD_guest.pdf)    
Sept 2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at ByteDance Seed Research about [Post-Training Data and Algorithms for LLM Agents](papers/ByteDance_Talk.pdf)    
Aug  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Keynote at [KDD 2025 Large Language Model For E-Commerce Workshop](https://kdd2025llm4ecommerce.github.io/schedule/) about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/keynote_LLMEcommerce.pdf)    
Aug  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at [DARPA ITM](https://www.darpa.mil/research/programs/in-the-moment) August 2025 PI Meeting    
May  2025&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tutorial at NAACL 2025 about [LLM Alignment for Copyright Risk Mitigation](papers/naacl25_tutorial.pdf)    
Oct  2024&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at UIUC-NLP about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/uiuc_nlp_10.25.2024.pdf)    
July 2024&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Talk at UCSD CSE about [LLM Reasoning & Alignment](papers/DARPA_talk.pdf)    

## Selected Publications [[Full List](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=JqGAil4AAAAJ&view_op=list_works&sortby=pubdate)]
#### ("\*" marks equal contribution.)

[RM-R1: Reward Modeling as Reasoning](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.02387)    
**Xiusi Chen**\*, Gaotang Li\*, Ziqi Wang\*, Bowen Jin, Cheng Qian, Yu Wang, Hongru WANG, Yu Zhang, Denghui Zhang, Tong Zhang, Hanghang Tong, Heng Ji    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/RM-R1-UIUC/RM-R1)\]\[[dataset & model checkpoints](https://huggingface.co/collections/gaotang/rm-r1-681128cdab932701cad844c8)\]    
<span style="color:red">100+ stars on GitHub</span>

[Beyond Log Likelihood: Probability-Based Objectives for Supervised Fine-Tuning across the Model Capability Continuum](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.00526)    
Gaotang Li\*, Ruizhong Qiu\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Heng Ji, Hanghang Tong    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/GaotangLi/Beyond-Log-Likelihood)\]    

[DecisionFlow: Advancing Large Language Model as Principled Decision Maker](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.21397)    
**Xiusi Chen**\*, Shanyong Wang\*, Cheng Qian\*, Hongru WANG\*, Peixuan Han, Heng Ji   
_EMNLP 2025 Findings_    
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/DecisionFlow)\]    

[MinPrompt: Graph-based Minimal Prompt Data Augmentation for Few-shot Question Answering](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.05007.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Wei-Cheng Chang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Hsiang-Fu Yu and Wei Wang     
_ACL 2024_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/MinPrompt)\]

[IterAlign: Iterative Constitutional Alignment of Large Language Models](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.18341.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Hongzhi Wen, Sreyashi Nag, Chen Luo, Qingyu Yin, Ruirui Li, Zheng Li, Wei Wang    
_NAACL 2024_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/IterAlign)\]

[PlayBest: Professional Basketball Player Behavior Synthesis via Planning with Diffusion](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.04090.pdf)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Wei-Yao Wang, Ziniu Hu, David Reynoso, Kun Jin, Mingyan Liu, P. Jeffrey Brantingham, Wei Wang     
_CIKM 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/diffuser_bball)\]

[A Comprehensive Survey of Scientific Large Language Models and Their Applications in Scientific Discovery](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.10833)    
Yu Zhang\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Bowen Jin\*, Sheng Wang, Shuiwang Ji, Wei Wang, Jiawei Han    
_EMNLP 2024_     
\[[repo](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/Awesome-Scientific-Language-Models)\]    
<span style="color:red">600+ stars on GitHub</span>

[Beyond Answers: Transferring Reasoning Capabilities to Smaller LLMs Using Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.04616.pdf)    
Yijun Tian\*, Yikun Han\*, **Xiusi Chen**\*, Wei Wang, Nitesh V. Chawla    
_WSDM 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/YikunHan42/TinyLLM)\]

[Gotta: Generative Few-shot Question Answering by Prompt-based Cloze Data Augmentation](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/epdf/10.1137/1.9781611977653.ch102)    
**Xiusi Chen**, Yu Zhang, Jinliang Deng, Jyun-Yu Jiang and Wei Wang  
_SDM 2023_     
\[[code](https://github.com/xiusic/Gotta)\]     
<span style="color:red">Best Poster Award (Honorable Mention), Regular Paper</span>

[Scalable Graph Representation Learning via Locality-Sensitive Hashing](papers/cikm_b.pdf)   
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2022_    
\[[code]()\]

[ReLiable: Offline Reinforcement Learning for Tactical Strategies in Professional Basketball Games](papers/cikm_a.pdf)       
**Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Kun Jin, Yichao Zhou, Mingyan Liu, Jefferey Brantingham and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2022_    
\[[code]()\]

[ToolRL: Reward is All Tool Learning Needs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.13958)    
Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur, Heng Ji    
_NeurIPS 2026_    
\[[code](https://github.com/qiancheng0/ToolRL)\]

<!--
[OTC: Optimal Tool Calls via Reinforcement Learning](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.14870)    
Hongru Wang, Cheng Qian, Wanjun Zhong, **Xiusi Chen**, Jiahao Qiu, Shijue Huang, Bowen Jin, Mengdi Wang, Kam-Fai Wong, Heng Ji    
_ArXiv 2025_    
\[[code]()\]
-->

[EscapeBench: Pushing Language Models to Think Outside the Box](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.13549)    
Cheng Qian, Peixuan Han, Qinyu Luo, Bingxiang He, **Xiusi Chen**, Yuji Zhang, Hongyi Du, Jiarui Yao, Xiaocheng Yang, Denghui Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Heng Ji    
_ACL 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/qiancheng0/EscapeBench)\]

<!--
[One Step towards Autonomous AI Agent: Reasoning, Alignment and Planning](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qc7g63d)    
**Xiusi Chen**    
Thesis Committee: Wei Wang, Yizhou Sun, Kai-Wei Chang, P. Jefferey Brantingham    
_Ph.D. Thesis, UCLA, 2024_
-->

[Strategist: Learning Strategic Skills by LLMs via Bi-Level Tree Search](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.10635)    
Jonathan Light, Min Cai, Weiqin Chen, Guanzhi Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Cheng, Yisong Yue, Ziniu Hu    
_ICLR 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/jonathanmli/Avalon-LLM)\]\[[project page](https://llm-strategist.github.io/)\] 

[Chain-of-Factors Paper-Reviewer Matching](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.14483)    
Yu Zhang, Yanzhen Shen, SeongKu Kang, **Xiusi Chen**, Bowen Jin, Jiawei Han    
_WWW 2025_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/CoF)\]

[Language Models as Semantic Indexers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.07815)    
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Guoyin Wang, **Xiusi Chen**, Tianxin Wei, Ruirui Li, Zhengyang Wang, Zheng Li, Yang Li, Hanqing Lu, Suhang Wang, Jiawei Han, Xianfeng Tang    
_ICML 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/PeterGriffinJin/LMIndexer)\]

[TPD: Enhancing Student Language Model Reasoning via Principle Discovery and Guidance](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.13849)    
Haorui Wang, Rongzhi Zhang, Yinghao Li, Lingkai Kong, Yuchen Zhuang, **Xiusi Chen**, Chao Zhang    
_COLM 2024_    

[Bridging Language and Items for Retrieval and Recommendation](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.03952) (**Amazon Reviews 2023**)    
Yupeng Hou\*, Jiacheng Li\*, Zhankui He, An Yan, **Xiusi Chen**, Julian McAuley    
_ArXiv 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/hyp1231/AmazonReviews2023)\]\[[website](https://amazon-reviews-2023.github.io/)\]\[[huggingface](https://huggingface.co/datasets/McAuley-Lab/Amazon-Reviews-2023)\]    
<span style="color:red">200+ stars on Github</span>    
<span style="color:red">500k+ downloads on HuggingFace</span>

<!--
[Disentangling Structured Components: Towards Adaptive, Interpretable and Scalable Time Series Forecasting](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10457027)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Du Yin, Yi Yang, Xuan Song, Ivor W. Tsang    
_TKDE 2024_    
\[[code](https://github.com/JLDeng/SCNN)\]

[How the Experience of California Wildfires Shapes Twitter Climate Change Framings](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-023-03668-0)    
Jessie W. Y. Ko, Shengquan Ni, Alexander Taylor, **Xiusi Chen**, Yicong Huang, Avinash Kumar, Sadeem Alsudais, Zuozhi Wang, Xiaozhen Liu, Wei Wang, Chen Li, Suellen Hopfer    
_Climatic Change, 2024_

[Data Science Tasks Using Scripts versus GUI-based Workflows: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly]()    
Alexander Taylor, Yicong Huang, Junheng Hao, Xinyuan Lin, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Wang, Chen Li    
_DataPlat@ICDE 2024_

[Weakly Supervised Multi-Label Classification of Full-Text Scientific Papers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2306.14003.pdf)       
Yu Zhang, Bowen Jin, **Xiusi Chen**, Yanzhen Shen, Yunyi Zhang, Yu Meng, and Jiawei Han    
_KDD 2023_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/FUTEX)\]

[A Multi-view Multi-task Learning Framework for Multi-variate Time Series Forecasting](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.01657.pdf)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song and Ivor W. Tsang   
_TKDE 2022_

[MotifClass: Weakly Supervised Text Classification with Higher-order Metadata Information](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.04022.pdf)    
Yu Zhang\*, Shweta Garg\*, Yu Meng, **Xiusi Chen** and Jiawei Han    
_WSDM 2022_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/MotifClass)\]

[COVID-19 Surveiller: Toward a Robust and Effective Pandemic Surveillance System based on Social Media Mining](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/epdf/10.1098/rsta.2021.0125)    
Jyun-Yu Jiang, Yichao Zhou, **Xiusi Chen**, Yan-Ru Jhou, Liqi Zhao, Sabrina Liu, Po-Chun Yang, Jule Ahmar, Wei Wang    
_Philosophical Transactions A, 2022_

[\#StayHome or \#Marathon? Social Media Enhanced Pandemic Surveillance on Spatial-temporal Dynamic Graphs](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3459637.3482222)    
Yichao Zhou, Jyun-Yu Jiang, **Xiusi Chen** and Wei Wang    
_CIKM 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/joey1993/pandemic-forecast)\]

[ST-Norm: Spatial and Temporal Normalization for Multi-variate Time Series Forecasting](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3447548.3467330)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song, and Ivor W. Tsang    
_KDD 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/JLDeng/ST-Norm)\]

[Evaluating audience loyalty and authenticity in influencer marketing via multi-task multi-relational learning](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/18060/17863)    
Seungbae Kim, **Xiusi Chen**, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Jinyoung Han, and Wei Wang    
_ICWSM 2021_

[The Pulse of Urban Transport: Exploring the Co-evolving Pattern for Spatio-temporal Forecasting](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3450528)    
Jinliang Deng, **Xiusi Chen**, Zipei Fan, Renhe Jiang, Xuan Song, and Ivor W. Tsang    
_TKDD 2021_

[Hierarchical Metadata-Aware Document Categorization under Weak Supervision](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.13556)    
Yu Zhang, **Xiusi Chen**, Yu Meng, Jiawei Han    
_WSDM 2021_    
\[[code](https://github.com/yuzhimanhua/HIMECat)\]

[Self-Attentive Few-Shot Learning for New User Recommendation in Location-based Social Networks](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3366423.3379994)    
Ruirui Li, Xian Wu, **Xiusi Chen**, Wei Wang    
_WWW 2020_

[Doc2Cube: Allocating Documents to Text Cube without Labeled Data](http://chaozhang.org/papers/icdm18.pdf)    
Fangbo Tao\*, Chao Zhang\*, **Xiusi Chen**, Meng Jiang, Tim Hanratty, Lance Kaplan, Jiawei Han    
_ICDM 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/fangbo-tao/doc2cube)\]

[TaxoGen: Unsupervised Topic Taxonomy Construction by Adaptive Term Embedding and Clustering](http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/3230000/3220064/p2701-zhang.pdf?ip=131.179.49.186&id=3220064&acc=ACTIVE%20SERVICE&key=CA367851C7E3CE77%2E79535EF926D6BC05%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35&__acm__=1543628672_ac235d30fba1750ceaae158e46248e19)    
Chao Zhang, Fangbo Tao, **Xiusi Chen**, Jiaming Shen, Meng Jiang, Brian Sadler, Michelle Vanni, Jiawei Han     
_KDD 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/franticnerd/taxogen)\]


[ATRank: An Attention-Based User Behavior Modeling Framework for Recommendation](papers/aaai18_zhou.pdf)    
Chang Zhou, Jinze Bai, Junshuai Song, Xiaofei Liu, Zhengchao Zhao, **Xiusi Chen**, Jun Gao    
_AAAI 2018_    
\[[code](https://github.com/jinze1994/ATRank)\]
-->

<!--
## Patent
[_Knowledge graph and alignment with uncertainty embedding_](https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/bb/ae/b3/bdfd4a1c6a8528/US20210103706A1.pdf)    
Wenchao Yu, Bo Zong, Wei Cheng, Haifeng Chen, **Xiusi Chen**    
_US Patent App. 17/060,850_
-->

## Academic Service
**Workshop Organizer**    
[_ACL 2026 workshop SURGeLLM: Structured Understanding, Retrieval, and Generation in LLMs era_](https://surgellm-acl.github.io/)    
[_KDD 2025 workshop on Structured Knowledge for Large Language Models_](https://sknowllm.github.io/index.html)    
Co-organizer of [UIUC-NLP Seminar series](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LEzop096QH4OOwHE-5eqyuG9d5a8nCiILZhhYlJhXIE/edit?usp=sharing)    

**Conference Program Committee**        
**Area Chair**        
_ACL Rolling Review_    
**Reviewer**        
_ICML 2023-2025; NeurIPS 2022-2025; ICLR 2022-2026; AAAI 2021-2024; IJCAI-ECAI 2022-2023;_    
_KDD 2020-2025; WSDM 2022-2025; WWW 2024;_    


**Journal Reviewer**    
_IEEE Transactions on Big Data (TBD)_.

## Honors and Awards
**2023**  [Best Poster Award (Honorable Mention)](images/bpahm.pdf), _SDM 2023_   
**2023**  SIAM Student Travel Award, _SIAM_   
**2021, 2022**  SIGIR Student Travel Grant, _ACM SIGIR_    
**2016, 2017**  Graduate Student Acedemic Scholarship, _Peking University_     
**2016**  Leo KoGuan Scholarshop, _Peking University_    
**2016**  Merit Student, _Peking University_     
**2014**  3rd Place of 17th Chinese University Basketball Association (CUBA) Championships, Beijing Division, _Federation of University Sports of China_   

## Miscellaneous
I played for [Peking University Men's Basketball varsity team](images/pkumbb.jpeg), division II.    
I was a registered swimming athlete in China during high school.    
I was born and raised in Changsha, Hunan, China.

<!-- 
## Links
[❤️ My Brilliant Fiancé](https://sites.google.com/site/ruihanwu14/)    
[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=JqGAil4AAAAJ)    
[Github](https://github.com/xiusic)    
[DBLP](https://dblp.org/pid/210/1049)    
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/XtremSup)    
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/xiusi-chen-53180583/)    
-->
